---
layout: post
title: "Why AVIF is the perfect replacement for GIF"
date: 2025-04-16 10:59:45 -0500
---

The GIF format is **terrible**. The *only* reason it's still used at all, is because it's widely supported, and it's
often treated special as the only image format that can be animated. In this blog post, I go over the problems with GIF,
and why I think the new format AVIF is the perfect successor to GIF in the modern world.

# Problems with GIF

## Compression

This is the main problem with the GIF format for me. GIF is from the 1980s, and animated GIFs are from the 90s, and
its compression is just as archaic as one might expect for a format that old. GIFs don't use the wonders of modern
inter-frame video compression and hardware acceleration, and instead exclusively uses "lossless" intra-frame
compression (compressing the frame itself, instead of utilizing the fact that in video, frames are similar and data can
be saved by just storing the difference between frames). GIFs are extremely inefficient when it comes to size. A video
that is a couple megabytes can blow up to 100x its size when attempting to turn into a GIF with minimal losses.

## Palette

The most distinctive appearance of modern GIFs is the limited palette. By default, a GIF can only have 256 colors per
frame (or 255 colors + one fully transparent color). Technically, there are techniques to get a wider palette. GIFs can
have different palettes per frame, and an individual frame can be split into chunks with individual palettes. Tools like
[gifski](https://gif.ski/) can encode fairly high quality gifs using these. However, these require extra encoding time,
and are often lost when websites re-compress GIFs. For example, Discord image previews quantize the color palette to 5
bits per channel, and all palette info beyond one palette per frame is lost.

Properly utilizing the GIF format depends on the encoder to use the palette smartly. Lazy encoders will use a fixed
default palette across all GIFs, and no dithering when downsampling, leading to abysmal color banding. Some improvements
smarter encoders can use are generating palettes based on the content of the frame, using one palette per frame,
or dithering to make better use of the limited palette.

In the real world, dithering has issues. When a dithered image is made smaller, especially with a limited palette, most
of the dithering information is lost. This is very common on the web, where bandwidth is aggressively optimized. Also,
better-looking dithering algorithms like error diffusion dithering look horrible for animations, as the dithering isn't
stable, so there's a static-y flickering effect.

## Transparency

GIFs technically support transparency, however, it's limited and buggy. You can have one color in the palette which is
fully transparent, and nothing else. This is good enough for most cases, but it is a limitation.

Another huge issue is partial frames. A GIF frame can choose to not override the previous frame, but be placed on top of
it, utilizing the transparency to preserve parts of the previous frame. This seems like a decent idea in theory, it
would improve compression, but most encoders and decoders don't fully understand it, and often have issues mixing
this with GIFs that are *supposed* to have transparency that clears between frames.

## Frame rate

GIFs store frame rate in a strange way. Each frame stores a number, which is how many hundredths of a second the frame
should be displayed for. This is an integer, meaning the frame rate of GIFs is "quantized". This isn't very noticable at
lower frame rates, but at smoother frame rates, there's limited options. For example, there are only 4 valid frame rates
above 24 fps: 100 fps (1), 50 fps (2), 33.3 fps (3), 25 fps (4). Some encoders get around this by varying the frame time
per frame so it averages out to the target FPS, which does work well, but it runs into another issue with frame rate.

The GIF format technically supports up to 100 fps, but many players or browsers (including Chrome!) refuse to play GIFs
at that speed, making any 1/100 duration frame take longer. This is especially annoying with encoders, such as FFmpeg,
that vary frame time to simulate higher FPS. Even with GIFs well below 50 fps, some encoders will still generate 1/100 s
frames to get closer to the target frame rate, which won't display properly.

# Properties a good GIF replacement should have

Now that we've discussed the issues GIF has, let's discuss the properties a good GIF replacement should have: improving
GIF's weaknesses and keeping its strengths

## Treated as an image by default

This is the main thing our format is trying to accomplish, however, this has little to do with the format and more to do
with the player. Our format shouldn't support audio as a first-class feature.

## Compression

Our format should use existing, modern, and efficient inter-frame compression. Ideally one that's widely supported with
hardware acceleration, so many can be played at once on a single screen. An option for lossless encoding is nice to
have, but good-looking lossy compression should be the ideal. We should also have a balance between good file size and
good performance. Advanced codecs like VP9 can be very heavy, especially when encoding, and this should be taken into
account.

## Transparency

Most video formats lack transparency capabilities, so it's worth noting that our format should have it. Ideally a full
alpha channel, not just a single transparent color.

## Backwards compatability

A nice thing to have for any new format is backwards compatability. My ideal for this is that, for a player that doesn't
know of the format, it should at least recognize the first frame as an image and display that.

## Playing as it loads

This is called progressive playback. This is something we take for granted with many formats, that you don't need the
entire file to begin playback. Some of the existing replacements don't support this, so it's worth mentioning. Some
formats also support progressive rendering, ie parts of the frame can be displayed without loading it in full, but this
isn't necessary, even if it is nice to have.

## No weird quirks that GIF has

Store framerate normally, no partial frames, no restricted palettes.

# Evaluating existing GIF replacements

Let's make a table of the properties we want our format to have, and update it as we go along.

<table class="table">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Treated as an image</th>
      <th>Good Compression</th>
      <th>Full Transparency</th>
      <th>Backwards Compatability</th>
      <th>Playing as it loads</th>
      <th>No weird quirks</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
</table>

## Traditional video codecs

Many websites with fine control over the player will just use normal videos in place of GIFs. This does work well for
those websites, but these cannot be easily shared without losing the GIF property or converting to a GIF. These also
often lack transparency capabilities.

<table class="table">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Treated as an image</th>
      <th>Good Compression</th>
      <th>Full Transparency</th>
      <th>Backwards Compatability</th>
      <th>Playing as it loads</th>
      <th>No weird quirks</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>❌</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>❌</td>
      <td>❌</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## APNG

APNG is fairly well known, and is an extension of the PNG format. It can store multiple PNG frames in sequence, and just
displays as a regular png image to players that don't support APNG. However, there is no inter-frame compression, just
one PNG per frame, which isn't super efficient on filesize. Each frame does support full PNG capabilities: so full
lossless 8 bits per channel color + transparency.

<table class="table">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Treated as an image</th>
      <th>Good Compression</th>
      <th>Full Transparency</th>
      <th>Backwards Compatability</th>
      <th>Playing as it loads</th>
      <th>No weird quirks</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>❌</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## WebP

WebP is very new and very controversial. Many people hate it due to inconsistent support, which isn't really a fault of
the format itself. WebP is a fairly good format, based on VP8 encoding, supporting lossy and lossless compression,
transparency, and animation. However, its animation has the same problem as APNG. It's not a true video codec, it's just
a sequence of individual WebP images, which doesn't compress super well.

<table class="table">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Treated as an image</th>
      <th>Good Compression</th>
      <th>Full Transparency</th>
      <th>Backwards Compatability</th>
      <th>Playing as it loads</th>
      <th>No weird quirks</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>❌</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## JPEG XL

JPEG XL is made by the same people who made JPEG. It supports animation, transparency, lossy and lossless encoding.
However, it has the same issue as APNG and WebP, it's not a true video codec, just a sequence of images. It even
inherits some weird quirks from GIF like partial frames.

<table class="table">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Treated as an image</th>
      <th>Good Compression</th>
      <th>Full Transparency</th>
      <th>Backwards Compatability</th>
      <th>Playing as it loads</th>
      <th>No weird quirks</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>❌</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>❌</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## AVIF

AVIF is a serious contender for GIF's place (and really all web images) given the requirements I've set out. It's based
on AV1, a super modern and amazing video codec. Animated AVIFs support a full AV1 video stream, with transparency,
lossless or lossy, and many other bells and whistles like HDR.

### The plot twist

Up until this point, this blog post was going to be about how I was going to design my own replacement for GIF, by using
the APNG-style backwards compatability on top of WebP. This is because I thought AVIF didn't support progressive
playback. My basic research suggested it wasn't possible. Also, transparent AVIFs have 2 streams: one for color and one
for alpha, and I assumed they were stored separately and so progressive playback wasn't possible. Turns out, they're
interweaved, one frame at a time. AVIF doesn't support progressive _rendering_ (rending parts of an individual frame or
a lower quality version of a frame before it's finished downloading).

But then... I actually tested it. I found an animated AVIF with transparency, limited my network speed (thanks Chrome
devtools!), and loaded it, and it started playing nearly instantly after the data started loading, and behaved just like
a GIF would, but taking up far less storage and looking far better. I was shocked. I was annoyed that I had to change
the premise of my article, but delighted that my perfect GIF replacement format _already existed!_ Although it requires
the browser to support AVIF itself, support for animation isn't required to display the first frame of an animated AVIF.

<table class="table">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Treated as an image</th>
      <th>Good Compression</th>
      <th>Full Transparency</th>
      <th>Backwards Compatability</th>
      <th>Playing as it loads</th>
      <th>No weird quirks</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️‼️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

## Our final table

<table class="table">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Format</th>
      <th>Treated as an image</th>
      <th>Good Compression</th>
      <th>Full Transparency</th>
      <th>Backwards Compatibility</th>
      <th>Playing as it loads</th>
      <th>No weird quirks</th>
    </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
      <td>Traditional Video Codecs</td>
      <td>❌</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>❌</td>
      <td>❌</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>APNG</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>❌</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>WebP</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>❌</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>JPEG XL</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>❌</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>❌</td>
    </tr>
    <tr>
      <td>AVIF</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
      <td>✔️</td>
    </tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

# Issues with AVIF

AVIF is fantastic. It's amazingly space efficient and has every feature you could want. However, we run into "the WebP"
problem, ie, support.

Most browsers _do_ support AVIF, but it's limited. AV1 is a very complex codec, and without hardware support, it's quite
hard to decode. Safari, notably, refuses to support AVIF without hardware support, which is only available on iPhone 15
or later, Macs with M3 or later, and iPads M4 or later. This is like, a couple years ago. I still daily-drive an iPhone
14 Pro.

There's also the eternal problem of websites that resize images as part of their CDN not having full support. Discord
does support AVIFs, but, from my testing, animated ones with transparency lose their animation when resized.

I'm struggling to even test support, since FFmpeg seems to be having trouble decoding animated AVIFs.

As mentioned previously, AV1 is a very heavy codec, and is an absolute resource hog when run without hardware
acceleration. This matters for GIFs, where its common to display many on the screen at once, such as in an online chat
platform or a twitch chat. Thankfully, hardware acceleration is getting there, it will just take some time.